---
layout: post
title: "A few predictions early on"
date: 2020-03-28 23:55:37 +0300
summary: "Views on the Covid-19 pandemic"
description: "Views on the Covid-19 pandemic"
tags: pandemic
---

Both on a societal and an individual level it’s extremely important to think ahead and prepare for change. This may sound like an elementary school teaching but I was extremely disappointed to see government after government fail to understand the importance of acting sooner while everyone around them was sinking. Therefore, with time in my hands, I wrote down a collection of ideas that are the product of reading what a lot of smart people have to say and expanding them.

## The pandemic itself

As the person that fought smallpox and won has said [here](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/larry-brilliant-helped-to-eradicate-smallpox-and-he-has-advice-for-covid-19/) , there will be a vaccine at some point probably after a year. That’s a long time for quarantine. There are many different medicines that can be re-purposed but they can’t cure the virus, they can only give better chances to people with severe disease. Even if we find a protective medicine such as chroloquine, giving it to 7 billion people as a prophylactic measure for months is unrealistic.

The game changer here are rapid tests. They can ensure that anyone getting off a plane is disease free so that in countries with closed borders that have gotten the virus under control it’s impossible to re-introduce it back, something that China & Singapore are currently struggling with. Security checks with tests in place don’t need to be country wide, they can also be in smaller communities. As an example, a small town in N. Italy that is disease free right now can check everyone coming in the town first.

The second game changer are antibody tests. Once they are widespread we can test and see who had the disease already. These people will help restart the economy, can help out in hospitals, can deliver food risk free, can start manufacturing again. If this sounds too good to be true keep reading. The huge downside of this when we factor in people that are on the verge of bankruptcy and want to keep feeding their families is that these people will start to try and deliberately get infected so they can go out and join the small but growing workforce. It’s going to give them the advantage that they never had in their profession. Maybe you are a lousy cook but if you are the only “certified for work” cook in your small town you will ask for a huge premium at the first desperate restaurant that wants to open up again. These jungle or free market dynamics -call them as you want-, can be regulated of course but regulation is cumbersome and is forward looking. Law patches can be voted for in empty parliaments but this will happen so rapidly that is quite difficult to control.

At this point, a significant part of the population but not yet enough for herd immunity can be functional, a small part of the economy will start opening up but only to people that are immune. That means that there will be restaurants and parties and theaters only for people with The certain bracelet. There is just no other way that this can play out since all epidemiologists agree that acquiring herd immunity is impossible without overwhelming the healthcare systems. In all probability almost all countries worldwide will implement a carrot and stick method where there is a lockdown until ICUs are freed up, then opening up a bit and then closing down again.

## Societal Impact

will be enormous in ways that we cannot currently comprehend. Changes that were already happening at fast speed now will happen at warp speed. All the senior managers that didn’t like video conferences, all the seniors that didn’t like to order food online or send sms messages, now they are forced to. So one aspect of this is that the opposite of what Paul Krugman famously said about the internet will happen. By 2025 it will become apparent that nothing is more important than technology, it is the driver of all economy and all fundamental needs of life across all industries. That is, if it wasn’t already apparent to all. But taking this as a given we can extrapolate to other interesting changes that will happen.

Real estate will not be the same because if work changes as fundamentally as we can see already happening with the rise of Zoom, it means that office space is much less important and job commuting will be much less important. As a thought experiment I am myself not entirely sure about this point because it comes in stark contrast with the theory of network effects while living in a big city, but I feel pretty confident saying that at least smaller, more affordable cities with more green can become more important. If we combine this with the advent of flying cars and/or very rapid transportation like Hyperloop then I feel more confident in my prediction that real estate values in major cities will go down in time or at least underperform other asset classes.

Personal hygiene and social interactions will permanently change. I remember back in my country (Greece) around 20 years back there was this TV show that made a research about what happens when you eat peanuts that are brought to you opened in a bar. Turned out the bars were re-using the peanuts after each customer and many (mostly male) customers — let me put it this way — were not fanatical about washing their hands after using the toilet. I won’t say more but this image stuck in my mind so vividly that influenced the way I think about germs and bacteria since then. That’s exactly what I predict will happen worldwide after this pandemic. People will be very mindful about being very close to many people, especially if someone from the group is coughing lightly or sneezing. Handshakes and kissing on the cheek everybody as hello and goodbye will probably take a long time to come back. Walking down the street and instinctively avoiding other people is something that is driven from fear currently. As any psychologist will tell you (need to verify this claim), this takes a long time to bring back to normal especially since there is nothing to lose by moving a few steps far from someone but it does make you feel a bit safer.

## Some philosophical last thoughts

Seeing the pandemic pan out and so many people in denial about it seemed to me like people cannot actually believe that something bad can happen outside of the movies. Someone pointed out that this is called [Norlmancy Bias](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normalcy_bias) and it’s an interesting read. What’s more is that very few people are currently alive that have experienced major disasters like the Great Depression and WWII. Let me be clear, I am only talking about the Western World (USA,Europe,Australia,NZ,Japan,some other parts) that has been very stable by all means over the last century. A person in Syria will laugh a lot by reading this paragraph for sure. But what I am saying is that a fundamental change will happen in that people will start thinking that nothing is out of the question anymore, a nuclear war is not out of the question — it never was by the way -. A chemical terririst act or biowarfare is also not out of the question since there are a) crazy people in the world and b) the technology. Things that smart people like Nick Bosstrom have been warning us about like malicious AI machines inflicting maximum damage to civilization is also not going to be met with as much normalncy bias and skepticism and even irony as before. I think that’s a good and positive thing that can come out of this crisis. I feel that the world can and will come more together through increased connectivity and compassion as seen now with countries helping each other with supplies and that’s only the beginning. Maybe this can become a catalyst to think more about the environment and the things that are more important than money. Maybe.

## Bonus Section — Entertainment & life outside of work

Many of us have seen the movie “Ready Player One” or similar things. VR is coming but unless it can actually look like reality soon my guess and my bet is that there will be products like concerts,theaters and even restaurants that will try to simulate reality. If we start thinking out of the box, what makes you physically go to a bar or a restaurant? It’s that you can _see_ people, chat with them, listen to the same music and be in the same surrounding. VR doesn’t quite cut it, people don’t look real there and the graphics will take a decade or more to make it up. Also more importantly, knowing that it’s graphics kind of kills the feeling. So let’s hypothetically talk about having dinner. You can of course fly to New York and meet that friend and pay \$2k for that. Or you can have a service that simulates this in a way that the food is the same, you can talk to each other and drink the same wine, listen to the same music and have people around you that are doing the same. They eat from the same menu and listen to the same music. Netflix is already ahead of the curve by introducing their “party” service where you binge watch with others.

If you find this interesting then get in touch so we can discuss this further.
